Huldar research project proposal:
1. Research subject
The subject I'm going to study is the quality of bus stops for 4 popular bus routes in the capital region
in Iceland with classification. Where quality will be a measure of how timely the bus routes for that bus stop is.
This is based off the possibility that I will get real bus data from Strætó (https://straeto.is/) which Strætó seems
very positive about. I have emailed them about the project idea and they said they could give me real data from 1 year of
runtime which is around 11 GB of data.
In case the bus data project doesn't pan out I can always fall back to kaggle.com and find something
like this https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/berkeleyearth/climate-change-earth-surface-temperature-data?select=GlobalTemperatures.csv)
And use that data to make predictions on the temperature in Reykjavík in the years 2024-2100 for example.

We want to make an algorithm that can take information about bus stops (location, number of stop from end of route, how many buses
can stop in the bus bulb (ísl. útskot) if there is one) along with information about the timetable and time of year to classify the bus stop and estimate
the departure time the bus will be for that specific bus stop. The actual bus departure time from the bus stop can be used to facilitate
supervised learning. Using this information we will create a simple bus stop quality rating (e.g. from 1-5) and have the algorithm rate
each bus stop so that Strætó can know which bus stop time tables are the ones that need the most attendance and which ones are working great.


2. Research paper
To find the paper we first need to choose an algorithm. Looking at https://mlforall.files.wordpress.com/2019/09/machinelearningalgorithms.png
After looking at a couple of them an interesting one is the radial basis function (RBF) neural network which is:
 - Easy to design
 - Good at generalizing
 - Fast at training
 - Simple (only 1 hidden layer)
 - Very tolerant to input noise
 - Easily interpretable. The meaning of each function in each node (since there is only 1 layer)
According to https://www.simplilearn.com/tutorials/machine-learning-tutorial/what-are-radial-basis-functions-neural-networks


I'm looking at this paper https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0893608097000026
and want to implement a radial basis function (RBF) neural network algorithm. The paper talks about an efficient method for constructing
RBF neural networks.
Also found this paper https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0895717706002639 which could be interesting.


3. Research data
The paper used a dataset with images of handwritten digits extracted from the zip codes on US mail envelopes but I hope to use a dataset containing
the trip data (location, bus stop time stamps, etc.) of 2-4 bus routes in Reykjavík for a whole year. I have requested this
data from Strætó and they are excited about the project and eager to help.
They said they would give us the data for routes 1, 2, 3 and 6 in an appropriate format on the 4th of september but we have not heard from them since.
If the data has not been delivered by the 12th of september we will contact them again about this.


4. Research group
For this project me, Arnar and Ragnar have decided to work with the same data and the same problem but using different algorithms
to solve that problem. In the end our hope is that we can compare our results and maybe see something interesting. We hope that this is okay
even though the research project is an individual assignment and not a group assignment. In the case that this violates the assignment
please let us know so we can respond accordingly and change our method according to your feedback.
In order to be able to compare our results we will use the same method for quality rating bus stops, the same goal (bus stop quality classification) and
the same input data (data and format). We might work with the data from Strætó to accomodate our needs in this respect.